README.md, before:

# LibreShockwave SDK

A Java library for parsing Macromedia/Adobe Director and Shockwave files (.dir, .dxr, .dcr, .cct, .cst).

## Requirements

- Java 21 or later

## Building

```bash
./gradlew build
```

## Supported Formats

- RIFX container (big-endian and little-endian)
- Afterburner-compressed files (.dcr, .cct)
- Director versions 4 through 12

## Capabilities

### Reading
- Cast members (bitmaps, text, scripts, sounds, shapes, palettes, fonts)
- Lingo bytecode with symbol resolution
- Score/timeline data (frames, channels, labels, behaviour intervals)
- File metadata (stage dimensions, tempo, version)

### Asset Extraction
- Bitmaps: 1/2/4/8/16/32-bit depths, palette support, PNG export
- Text: Field (type 3) and Text (type 12) cast members via STXT chunks
- Sound: PCM to WAV conversion, MP3 extraction, IMA ADPCM decoding
- Palettes: Built-in Director palettes and custom CLUT chunks

### Writing
- Save to uncompressed RIFX format
- Remove protection from protected files
- Decompile and embed Lingo source into cast members

## Screenshots

### An example piece of software created with this library.

<img width="1127" height="749" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/de4f99d2-87ed-4c78-8422-a84bcf9faeca" />

## Usage

### Loading a File

```java
import com.libreshockwave.DirectorFile;
import java.nio.file.Path;

// From file path
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(Path.of("movie.dcr"));

// From byte array
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(bytes);
```

### Accessing Metadata

```java
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(Path.of("movie.dcr"));

file.isAfterburner();                    // true if compressed
file.getEndian();                        // BIG_ENDIAN (Mac) or LITTLE_ENDIAN (Windows)
file.getStageWidth();                    // stage width in pixels
file.getStageHeight();                   // stage height in pixels
file.getTempo();                         // frames per second
file.getConfig().directorVersion();      // internal version number
file.getChannelCount();                  // sprite channels (48-1000 depending on version)
```

### Iterating Cast Members

```java
for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    int id = member.id();
    String name = member.name();

    if (member.isBitmap()) { /* ... */ }
    if (member.isScript()) { /* ... */ }
    if (member.isSound()) { /* ... */ }
    if (member.isField()) { /* old-style text */ }
    if (member.isText()) { /* rich text */ }
    if (member.hasTextContent()) { /* either field or text */ }
}
```

### Extracting Bitmaps

```java
for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    if (!member.isBitmap()) continue;

    file.decodeBitmap(member).ifPresent(bitmap -> {
        BufferedImage image = bitmap.toBufferedImage();
        ImageIO.write(image, "PNG", new File(member.name() + ".png"));
    });
}
```

### Extracting Text

```java
KeyTableChunk keyTable = file.getKeyTable();

for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    if (!member.hasTextContent()) continue;

    for (KeyTableChunk.KeyTableEntry entry : keyTable.getEntriesForOwner(member.id())) {
        if (entry.fourccString().equals("STXT")) {
            Chunk chunk = file.getChunk(entry.sectionId());
            if (chunk instanceof TextChunk textChunk) {
                String text = textChunk.text();
            }
            break;
        }
    }
}
```

### Extracting Sounds

```java
import com.libreshockwave.audio.SoundConverter;

for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    if (!member.isSound()) continue;

    for (KeyTableChunk.KeyTableEntry entry : keyTable.getEntriesForOwner(member.id())) {
        if (entry.fourccString().equals("snd ")) {
            SoundChunk sound = (SoundChunk) file.getChunk(entry.sectionId());

            if (sound.isMp3()) {
                byte[] mp3 = SoundConverter.extractMp3(sound);
            } else {
                byte[] wav = SoundConverter.toWav(sound);
            }
            break;
        }
    }
}
```

### Accessing Scripts and Bytecode

```java
ScriptNamesChunk names = file.getScriptNames();

for (ScriptChunk script : file.getScripts()) {
    // Script-level declarations
    List<String> globals = script.getGlobalNames(names);
    List<String> properties = script.getPropertyNames(names);

    for (ScriptChunk.Handler handler : script.handlers()) {
        String handlerName = names.getName(handler.nameId());
        int argCount = handler.argCount();
        int localCount = handler.localCount();

        // Argument and local variable names
        for (int id : handler.argNameIds()) {
            String argName = names.getName(id);
        }
        for (int id : handler.localNameIds()) {
            String localName = names.getName(id);
        }

        // Bytecode instructions
        for (ScriptChunk.Handler.Instruction instr : handler.instructions()) {
            int offset = instr.offset();
            Opcode opcode = instr.opcode();
            int argument = instr.argument();
        }
    }
}
```

### Aggregating Globals and Properties

```java
// All unique globals across all scripts
Set<String> allGlobals = file.getAllGlobalNames();

// All unique properties across all scripts
Set<String> allProperties = file.getAllPropertyNames();

// Detailed info per script
for (DirectorFile.ScriptInfo info : file.getScriptInfoList()) {
    info.scriptId();
    info.scriptName();
    info.scriptType();
    info.globals();
    info.properties();
    info.handlers();
}
```

### Reading Score Data

```java
if (file.hasScore()) {
    ScoreChunk score = file.getScoreChunk();
    int frames = score.getFrameCount();
    int channels = score.getChannelCount();

    // Frame labels
    FrameLabelsChunk labels = file.getFrameLabelsChunk();
    if (labels != null) {
        for (FrameLabelsChunk.FrameLabel label : labels.labels()) {
            int frameNum = label.frameNum();
            String labelName = label.label();
        }
    }

    // Behaviour intervals
    for (ScoreChunk.FrameInterval interval : score.frameIntervals()) {
        int start = interval.startFrame();
        int end = interval.endFrame();
        int scriptId = interval.scriptId();
    }
}
```

### Accessing Raw Chunks

```java
// All chunk metadata
for (DirectorFile.ChunkInfo info : file.getAllChunkInfo()) {
    int id = info.id();
    ChunkType type = info.type();
    int offset = info.offset();
    int length = info.length();
}

// Specific chunk by ID
Chunk chunk = file.getChunk(42);

// Type-safe chunk access
file.getChunk(42, BitmapChunk.class).ifPresent(bitmap -> {
    byte[] data = bitmap.data();
});
```

### External Cast Files

```java
for (String castPath : file.getExternalCastPaths()) {
    Path resolved = baseDir.resolve(castPath);
    if (Files.exists(resolved)) {
        DirectorFile castFile = DirectorFile.load(resolved);
    }
}
```

### Saving Files

```java
// Load compressed/protected file
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(Path.of("protected.dcr"));

// Save as unprotected RIFX (decompiles scripts automatically)
file.save(Path.of("unprotected.dir"));

// Or get bytes
byte[] rifxData = file.saveToBytes();
```

## Tools

### Cast Extractor GUI

```bash
./gradlew :sdk:extractCasts
```

### Running Tests

```bash
./gradlew :sdk:test
./gradlew :sdk:runTests          # Integration tests
./gradlew :sdk:runFeatureTests   # Feature tests
```

## Architecture

The library is organised into the following packages:

- `com.libreshockwave` - Main `DirectorFile` class
- `com.libreshockwave.chunks` - Chunk type parsers (CASt, Lscr, BITD, STXT, etc.)
- `com.libreshockwave.bitmap` - Bitmap decoding and palette handling
- `com.libreshockwave.audio` - Sound conversion utilities
- `com.libreshockwave.lingo` - Opcode definitions and decompiler
- `com.libreshockwave.io` - Binary readers/writers
- `com.libreshockwave.format` - File format utilities (Afterburner, chunk types)
- `com.libreshockwave.cast` - Cast member type definitions

## References

This implementation draws from:

- [dirplayer-rs](https://github.com/igorlira/dirplayer-rs) by Igor Lira
- [ProjectorRays](https://github.com/ProjectorRays/ProjectorRays) by Debby Servilla
- ScummVM Director engine documentation

## Licence

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.

Commit message:

Update README with player development details
Added information about player development and future plans.

README.md, after:

# LibreShockwave SDK

A Java library for parsing Macromedia/Adobe Director and Shockwave files (.dir, .dxr, .dcr, .cct, .cst).

## Requirements

- Java 21 or later

## Building

```bash
./gradlew build
```

## Supported Formats

- RIFX container (big-endian and little-endian)
- Afterburner-compressed files (.dcr, .cct)
- Director versions 4 through 12

## Capabilities

### Reading
- Cast members (bitmaps, text, scripts, sounds, shapes, palettes, fonts)
- Lingo bytecode with symbol resolution
- Score/timeline data (frames, channels, labels, behaviour intervals)
- File metadata (stage dimensions, tempo, version)

### Asset Extraction
- Bitmaps: 1/2/4/8/16/32-bit depths, palette support, PNG export
- Text: Field (type 3) and Text (type 12) cast members via STXT chunks
- Sound: PCM to WAV conversion, MP3 extraction, IMA ADPCM decoding
- Palettes: Built-in Director palettes and custom CLUT chunks

### Writing
- Save to uncompressed RIFX format
- Remove protection from protected files
- Decompile and embed Lingo source into cast members

## Screenshots

###

This player is currently in development. The aim is to get it working within our Java Swing UI player and then eventually start a new project where it's compiled using TeaVM into WASM for browser playback.

All "player" functionality is decoupled from the SDK and VM projects so it will be easy to convert in future.

<img width="2174" height="1048" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/3c8f0357-0941-4dd4-9795-525a45216644" />


### An example piece of software created with this library.

Cast Extractor (on releases page):

<img width="1127" height="749" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/de4f99d2-87ed-4c78-8422-a84bcf9faeca" />

## Usage

### Loading a File

```java
import com.libreshockwave.DirectorFile;
import java.nio.file.Path;

// From file path
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(Path.of("movie.dcr"));

// From byte array
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(bytes);
```

### Accessing Metadata

```java
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(Path.of("movie.dcr"));

file.isAfterburner();                    // true if compressed
file.getEndian();                        // BIG_ENDIAN (Mac) or LITTLE_ENDIAN (Windows)
file.getStageWidth();                    // stage width in pixels
file.getStageHeight();                   // stage height in pixels
file.getTempo();                         // frames per second
file.getConfig().directorVersion();      // internal version number
file.getChannelCount();                  // sprite channels (48-1000 depending on version)
```

### Iterating Cast Members

```java
for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    int id = member.id();
    String name = member.name();

    if (member.isBitmap()) { /* ... */ }
    if (member.isScript()) { /* ... */ }
    if (member.isSound()) { /* ... */ }
    if (member.isField()) { /* old-style text */ }
    if (member.isText()) { /* rich text */ }
    if (member.hasTextContent()) { /* either field or text */ }
}
```

### Extracting Bitmaps

```java
for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    if (!member.isBitmap()) continue;

    file.decodeBitmap(member).ifPresent(bitmap -> {
        BufferedImage image = bitmap.toBufferedImage();
        ImageIO.write(image, "PNG", new File(member.name() + ".png"));
    });
}
```

### Extracting Text

```java
KeyTableChunk keyTable = file.getKeyTable();

for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    if (!member.hasTextContent()) continue;

    for (KeyTableChunk.KeyTableEntry entry : keyTable.getEntriesForOwner(member.id())) {
        if (entry.fourccString().equals("STXT")) {
            Chunk chunk = file.getChunk(entry.sectionId());
            if (chunk instanceof TextChunk textChunk) {
                String text = textChunk.text();
            }
            break;
        }
    }
}
```

### Extracting Sounds

```java
import com.libreshockwave.audio.SoundConverter;

for (CastMemberChunk member : file.getCastMembers()) {
    if (!member.isSound()) continue;

    for (KeyTableChunk.KeyTableEntry entry : keyTable.getEntriesForOwner(member.id())) {
        if (entry.fourccString().equals("snd ")) {
            SoundChunk sound = (SoundChunk) file.getChunk(entry.sectionId());

            if (sound.isMp3()) {
                byte[] mp3 = SoundConverter.extractMp3(sound);
            } else {
                byte[] wav = SoundConverter.toWav(sound);
            }
            break;
        }
    }
}
```

### Accessing Scripts and Bytecode

```java
ScriptNamesChunk names = file.getScriptNames();

for (ScriptChunk script : file.getScripts()) {
    // Script-level declarations
    List<String> globals = script.getGlobalNames(names);
    List<String> properties = script.getPropertyNames(names);

    for (ScriptChunk.Handler handler : script.handlers()) {
        String handlerName = names.getName(handler.nameId());
        int argCount = handler.argCount();
        int localCount = handler.localCount();

        // Argument and local variable names
        for (int id : handler.argNameIds()) {
            String argName = names.getName(id);
        }
        for (int id : handler.localNameIds()) {
            String localName = names.getName(id);
        }

        // Bytecode instructions
        for (ScriptChunk.Handler.Instruction instr : handler.instructions()) {
            int offset = instr.offset();
            Opcode opcode = instr.opcode();
            int argument = instr.argument();
        }
    }
}
```

### Aggregating Globals and Properties

```java
// All unique globals across all scripts
Set<String> allGlobals = file.getAllGlobalNames();

// All unique properties across all scripts
Set<String> allProperties = file.getAllPropertyNames();

// Detailed info per script
for (DirectorFile.ScriptInfo info : file.getScriptInfoList()) {
    info.scriptId();
    info.scriptName();
    info.scriptType();
    info.globals();
    info.properties();
    info.handlers();
}
```

### Reading Score Data

```java
if (file.hasScore()) {
    ScoreChunk score = file.getScoreChunk();
    int frames = score.getFrameCount();
    int channels = score.getChannelCount();

    // Frame labels
    FrameLabelsChunk labels = file.getFrameLabelsChunk();
    if (labels != null) {
        for (FrameLabelsChunk.FrameLabel label : labels.labels()) {
            int frameNum = label.frameNum();
            String labelName = label.label();
        }
    }

    // Behaviour intervals
    for (ScoreChunk.FrameInterval interval : score.frameIntervals()) {
        int start = interval.startFrame();
        int end = interval.endFrame();
        int scriptId = interval.scriptId();
    }
}
```

### Accessing Raw Chunks

```java
// All chunk metadata
for (DirectorFile.ChunkInfo info : file.getAllChunkInfo()) {
    int id = info.id();
    ChunkType type = info.type();
    int offset = info.offset();
    int length = info.length();
}

// Specific chunk by ID
Chunk chunk = file.getChunk(42);

// Type-safe chunk access
file.getChunk(42, BitmapChunk.class).ifPresent(bitmap -> {
    byte[] data = bitmap.data();
});
```

### External Cast Files

```java
for (String castPath : file.getExternalCastPaths()) {
    Path resolved = baseDir.resolve(castPath);
    if (Files.exists(resolved)) {
        DirectorFile castFile = DirectorFile.load(resolved);
    }
}
```

### Saving Files

```java
// Load compressed/protected file
DirectorFile file = DirectorFile.load(Path.of("protected.dcr"));

// Save as unprotected RIFX (decompiles scripts automatically)
file.save(Path.of("unprotected.dir"));

// Or get bytes
byte[] rifxData = file.saveToBytes();
```

## Tools

### Cast Extractor GUI

```bash
./gradlew :sdk:extractCasts
```

### Running Tests

```bash
./gradlew :sdk:test
./gradlew :sdk:runTests          # Integration tests
./gradlew :sdk:runFeatureTests   # Feature tests
```

## Architecture

The library is organised into the following packages:

- `com.libreshockwave` - Main `DirectorFile` class
- `com.libreshockwave.chunks` - Chunk type parsers (CASt, Lscr, BITD, STXT, etc.)
- `com.libreshockwave.bitmap` - Bitmap decoding and palette handling
- `com.libreshockwave.audio` - Sound conversion utilities
- `com.libreshockwave.lingo` - Opcode definitions and decompiler
- `com.libreshockwave.io` - Binary readers/writers
- `com.libreshockwave.format` - File format utilities (Afterburner, chunk types)
- `com.libreshockwave.cast` - Cast member type definitions

## References

This implementation draws from:

- [dirplayer-rs](https://github.com/igorlira/dirplayer-rs) by Igor Lira
- [ProjectorRays](https://github.com/ProjectorRays/ProjectorRays) by Debby Servilla
- ScummVM Director engine documentation

## Licence

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0. See [LICENSE](LICENSE) for details.
